Design Note: Implicit Semicolons
Programmers today are spoiled for choice in languages and have gotten picky about syntax. They want their language to look clean and modern. One bit of syntactic lichen that almost every new language scrapes off (and some ancient ones like BASIC never had) is ; as an explicit statement terminator.

Instead, they treat a newline as a statement terminator where it makes sense to do so. The “where it makes sense” part is the challenging bit. While most statements are on their own line, sometimes you need to spread a single statement across a couple of lines. Those intermingled newlines should not be treated as terminators.

Most of the obvious cases where the newline should be ignored are easy to detect, but there are a handful of nasty ones:

A return value on the next line:

if (condition) return
"value"
Is “value” the value being returned, or do we have a return statement with no value followed by an expression statement containing a string literal?

A parenthesized expression on the next line:

func
(parenthesized)
Is this a call to func(parenthesized), or two expression statements, one for func and one for a parenthesized expression?

A - on the next line:

first
-second
Is this first - second—an infix subtraction—or two expression statements, one for first and one to negate second?

In all of these, either treating the newline as a separator or not would both produce valid code, but possibly not the code the user wants. Across languages, there is an unsettling variety of rules used to decide which newlines are separators. Here are a couple:

Lua completely ignores newlines, but carefully controls its grammar such that no separator between statements is needed at all in most cases. This is perfectly legit:

a = 1 b = 2
Lua avoids the return problem by requiring a return statement to be the very last statement in a block. If there is a value after return before the keyword end, it must be for the return. For the other two cases, they allow an explicit ; and expect users to use that. In practice, that almost never happens because there’s no point in a parenthesized or unary negation expression statement.

Go handles newlines in the scanner. If a newline appears following one of a handful of token types that are known to potentially end a statement, the newline is treated like a semicolon. Otherwise it is ignored. The Go team provides a canonical code formatter, gofmt, and the ecosystem is fervent about its use, which ensures that idiomatic styled code works well with this simple rule.

Python treats all newlines as significant unless an explicit backslash is used at the end of a line to continue it to the next line. However, newlines anywhere inside a pair of brackets ((), [], or {}) are ignored. Idiomatic style strongly prefers the latter.

This rule works well for Python because it is a highly statement-oriented language. In particular, Python’s grammar ensures a statement never appears inside an expression. C does the same, but many other languages which have a “lambda” or function literal syntax do not.

An example in JavaScript:

console.log(function() {
statement();
});
Here, the console.log() expression contains a function literal which in turn contains the statement statement();.

Python would need a different set of rules for implicitly joining lines if you could get back into a statement where newlines should become meaningful while still nested inside brackets. (And now you know why Python’s lambda allows only a single expression body.)

JavaScript’s “automatic semicolon insertion” rule is the real odd one. Where other languages assume most newlines are meaningful and only a few should be ignored in multi-line statements, JS assumes the opposite. It treats all of your newlines as meaningless whitespace unless it encounters a parse error. If it does, it goes back and tries turning the previous newline into a semicolon to get something grammatically valid.

This design note would turn into a design diatribe if I went into complete detail about how that even works, much less all the various ways that JavaScript’s “solution” is a bad idea. It’s a mess. JavaScript is the only language I know where many style guides demand explicit semicolons after every statement even though the language theoretically lets you elide them.

If you’re designing a new language, you almost surely should avoid an explicit statement terminator. Programmers are creatures of fashion like other humans, and semicolons are as passé as ALL CAPS KEYWORDS. Just make sure you pick a set of rules that make sense for your language’s particular grammar and idioms. And don’t do what JavaScript did.
