- A variable statement doesn’t just define a new variable, it can also be used to redefine an existing variable.
- A scope defines a region where a name maps to a certain entity. Multiple scopes enable the same name to refer to different things in different contexts.

- “Lexical” comes from the Greek “lexikos” which means “related to words”. When we use it in programming languages, it usually means a thing you can figure out from source code itself without having to execute anything.

- In a dynamically typed, garbage-collected language, that isn’t really necessary, so you can get away with making declarations implicit. It feels a little more “scripty”, more “you know what I mean”.
- But is that a good idea? Implicit declaration has some problems:
  - A user may intend to assign to an existing variable, but may have misspelled it. The interpreter doesn’t know that, so it goes ahead and silently creates some new variable and the variable the user wanted to assign to still has its old value. This is particularly heinous in JavaScript where a typo will create a global variable, which may in turn interfere with other code.
  - JS, Ruby, and CoffeeScript use the presence of an existing variable with the same name—even in an outer scope—to determine whether or not an assignment creates a new variable or assigns to an existing one. That means adding a new variable in a surrounding scope can change the meaning of existing code. What was once a local variable may silently turn into an assignment to that new outer variable.
